---
layout: post
title: Notes from R-Finance 2019
date: 2020-02-05
tags: [r, conference]
---

Last month I hoped across the Atlantic to the windy city of Chicago
for the annual conference about using R in finance. It was a two day
conference with a mixture of 5 minute lightning talks, longer sessions
and keynote speakers. Over the two days all walks of finance were
discussed; equities, bonds even cryptocurrencies. The conferences even
provided breakfast and lunch which was a nice surprise, usually you pay
your massive registration fee and left to fend for meals.

{% include newsletter.html %}

I spoke about FX trading with a lightning
presentation on using Hawkes processes to predict FX trades times. It
was my first time presenting at a conference and nice to finally put a
slideshow together and sell what I've been doing for the last four
years of my life.

Matt Taddy of Amazon was there speaking about measuring innovation but
he pointed out some best practices for the machine learning
workflow. One of which is the importance of generating new data, which
means you need to be thinking of experiments to collect new
data which can then be used to validate the previous predictions. He
also briefly mentioned double machine learning, which is a causal
framework for estimating treatment effects using machine
learning. Overall, his talk was a great overview of how machine
learning should be used in a business setting and what you need to
consider before during and after the model has been built. This brief
summary doesn't really do it justice, but, he has a book coming out
soon that I will be purchasing. 

A talk by Brian Boonstra showed how doing statistics on a high
frequency financial dataset is trickier than just applying the standard
methods. He showed that Bitcoin displays fat tails that cannot be
attributed to stochastic volatility which in turn implies that
traditional market making techniques can't be applied to
cryptocurrencies. This is a typically theoretical result that might
not be true in practice, I'm sure there are plenty of people out there
that have proven this. Talks like this highlight how Bitcoin has
helped make high-frequency methods more accessible as the data is
available for free.

Tactical asset allocation using machine learning by Majeed
Simaan. This was about using machine learning to predict market returns
and then using these predictions to make allocations decisions. I liked
this talk because it outlined how predictions can be translated
directly into asset allocations. Then after googling the speaker I
found that he had made an RPubs notebook that mirrors the talk
([here](https://rpubs.com/simaan84/ML_asset_allocation)). It takes you
through the full analysis: downloading the data, preparing the data,
modelling the data, extracting the signal and backtesting the
strategy. I'm currently implementing my own version heavily inspired
by this post.

Overall, the two days really opened my eyes to how broad finance can
be and these three talks that I've highlighted only scratched the surface
of what was on offer. For a relatively `small' conference it was great
to learn so much across a wide variety of things.
